                                 HHS Public Access
                                 Author manuscript
                                 Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
Author Manuscript




                    Data Resources for Conducting Patient-Centered Outcomes
                    Research at Federally Qualified Health Centers: The National
                    Ambulatory Medical Care Survey
                    Lello Guluma, MPH*, Brian W. Ward, PhD*, Sonja N. Williams, MPH*, Cindy Zhang, MPH*,
                    Cordell Golden, MPS*
                    *National Center for Health Statistics, 3311 Toledo Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782
Author Manuscript




                    Abstract
                         Background: Federally qualified health centers and look-alikes are outpatient care settings
                         that provide primary care and other health services in health professional shortage areas and
                         to their populations. Compiling and disseminating data from these centers that is accessible for
                         patient-centered outcomes research (PCOR) is critical to understanding healthcare provided at
                         these settings.

                         Objective: To describe the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center (NAMCS
                         HC) Component, and how this redesigned survey can be utilized to understand healthcare provided
                         at health centers, improve data capacity, and facilitate PCOR.

                         Methods: Beginning in 2021, the NAMCS HC Component began collecting visit data through
Author Manuscript




                         electronic health record (EHR) submission from a nationally representative sample of FQHCs
                         and FQHC look-alikes. Resulting datasets are made available for researchers to analyze, used to
                         produce readily available interactive data visualizations, and linked to external datasets.

                         Results: The NAMCS HC Component and its resulting data resources are described. Availability
                         of restricted and public datafiles is highlighted, with an example of how these can be used to study
                         visits across different patient characteristics. Interactive dashboards are presented, including how
                         researchers, health centers, and patients can view biannual preliminary visit rates/counts. Finally,
                         linkages between the NAMCS HC Component and external data sources are highlighted, including
                         how these linkages can be used to study health outcomes among different populations.

                         Conclusions: EHR data collected from FQHCs and look-alikes through the redesigned NAMCS
                         HC Component fills a gap to improve PCOR capacity at these unique settings.
Author Manuscript




                    Keywords
                         Data linkage; FQHC look-alikes; mental health; maternal health




                    Correspondence to: Brian W. Ward, PhD, National Center for Health Statistics, 3311 Toledo Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782.
                    bwward@cdc.gov.
                    Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
                    Disclaimer: The findings and conclusions in this manuscript are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official
                    position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or National Center for Health Statistics.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                               Page 2


                                    Federally qualified health centers (FQHCs) and FQHC look-alikes (i.e., health centers
Author Manuscript




                                    meeting all Health Resources and Services Administration [HRSA] Health Center Program
                                    requirements but not receiving Program funding) are community-based healthcare settings
                                    that provide primary care and other health services in health professional shortage areas
                                    (HPSAs) and to their populations.1–3 FQHCs and look-alikes are important sources of
                                    healthcare in HPSAs, serve to mitigate differences in health outcomes,4–6 and allow access
                                    to quality healthcare which contributes to reduction in health differences.7–10 In 2023,
                                    FQHCs served 31.3 million patients in the United States.11 Patients who use FQHCs may
                                    differ from the U.S. population; for example, in 2023 67.3% of FQHC patients were in
                                    poverty11 compared to 11.1% of the U.S population.12

                                    Because of the uniqueness of populations served by FQHCs and look-alikes, having data to
                                    examine the healthcare provided at these settings is critical to understanding their role in
                                    achieving improved health across the United States. HRSA oversees and monitors the Health
Author Manuscript




                                    Center Program and currently has a reporting system called the Uniform Data System (UDS)
                                    that requires FQHCs and look-alikes to report on selected patient characteristics, services
                                    provided, health outcomes, and center staffing.13 This system is currently expanding to
                                    include more patient-level measures.14 Although the UDS has been an important source
                                    of data, the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) provides visit-level data
                                    that can facilitate detailed patient-centered outcomes research (PCOR). In 2021 the NAMCS
                                    component that collected data from health centers was redesigned and began collecting
                                    all visits from participating health centers for the entire calendar year via electronic
                                    health record (EHR) submission. This has led to additional data resources for researchers,
                                    healthcare providers, and patients to understand not only what types of care are provided at
                                    health centers, but also to explore potential differences that may exist in provision of this
                                    care.
Author Manuscript




                                    This manuscript aims to describe the NAMCS HC Component and how it provides data
                                    resources that can be utilized to understand healthcare provided at FQHCs and look-alikes.
                                    To demonstrate its ability to facilitate enhanced data capacity for studying PCOR, three
                                    empirical examples highlighting the utility of the NAMCS HC Component are provided:
                                    (1) visit-level datafiles, (2) interactive data visualizations, and (3) linkage to external data
                                    sources.


                       METHODOLOGY
                                    The NAMCS HC Component is a nationally representative establishment survey that
                                    collects data on ambulatory medical care visits to FQHCs and FQHC look-alikes
                                    (henceforth, collectively referred to as health centers) throughout the 50 U.S. states and
Author Manuscript




                                    District of Columbia. The NAMCS HC Component collects EHR visit data on patient
                                    characteristics, medical diagnoses and procedures, lab tests and results, and medications. In
                                    addition, patient personally identifiable information (PII) is also collected, which allows for
                                    linkage to external datasets to expand its analytic capabilities. Its 2021 sampling frame was
                                    approximately 1,400 health centers, where a primary sample of 50 health centers was drawn,
                                    along with a reserve sample of 100 centers. If one of the 50 centers in the primary sample
                                    declined or was unable to participate, a similar center from the reserve sample was then


                                         Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                            Page 3


                                    contacted for participation. Participating health centers were eligible for a one-time, set-up
                                    fee to reimburse for any costs of participation.15 This yielded 29 health centers participating
Author Manuscript




                                    in the 2021 NAMCS HC Component. In 2022, new primary and reserve samples were drawn
                                    from which new health centers were recruited. In addition, health centers first participating
                                    in 2021 were asked to continue and submit data for 2022. A similar sampling strategy
                                    for the survey has continued in proceeding years, yielding over 9 million visits from 95
                                    participating centers in 2023 (Table 1). Additional details on NAMCS HC Component
                                    methodology are available elsewhere.16–18

                                    Data collection for the NAMCS HC Component occurs in four steps.15 First, sampled health
                                    centers are contacted by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) to gain agreement
                                    to participate. If agreeable, the participating center answers a ~45-minute questionnaire
                                    with responses used to calculate survey weights that can generate national estimates of
                                    health center visits. Next, NCHS works with the health center (and their EHR vendor), to
Author Manuscript




                                    install the HL7 CDA R2 Implementation Guide: National Health Care Surveys, Release 1,
                                    DSTU Release 1.2,19 a “template” for EHR systems that allows a center to submit the data
                                    requested for the survey. A testing and validation (T&V) file is then submitted by the health
                                    center for basic quality assessment and to ensure the EHR data meet survey requirements.
                                    Finally, upon successfully passing T&V, EHR datafiles are then submitted to NCHS, where
                                    each record is a single medical encounter. Further details on data collection and other
                                    methodological considerations of the NAMCS HC Component are available elsewhere (See
                                    Appendix).


                       DATA RESOURCES FOR PCOR
                       Visit-level Datafiles
Author Manuscript




                                    Data from the NAMCS HC Component are made publicly available to researchers. The
                                    survey does not focus on surveillance of visits for a specific medical condition or type
                                    of care, thus its nationally representative data can be used by researchers to explore and
                                    examine any healthcare research topic of their own interest from chronic conditions such as
                                    asthma and diabetes, to mental health, substance use, and more.20

                                    NAMCS HC Component data are released annually, and each year two different versions
                                    of the datafile are available. The first is a restricted use datafile containing millions of
                                    records from all participating health centers (Table 1),21–23 as well as a full set of data
                                    elements. These files can be accessed by individuals for their own research through the
                                    NCHS Research Data Center (https://www.cdc.gov/rdc/index.html); however, researchers
                                    must submit an application and provide a fee for their use. To further enhance accessibility,
Author Manuscript




                                    in 2022 a public use version of the datafile was released. This version contains 5% of
                                    total records collected, with weights developed that allow users to generate nationally
                                    representative estimates of visits to health centers (methodology of the creation of the
                                    5% sample is detailed elsewhere18). Unlike the restricted NAMCS HC Component files,
                                    these 5% public use files are accessible with no fee and prevent need for a large amount
                                    of computing power being a barrier to PCOR researchers who wish to use these data.
                                    These files can be download directly from: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/namcs/documentation/



                                          Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                             Page 4


                                    index.html. Details on data elements available in these files and accessing restricted datafiles
Author Manuscript




                                    are in the Appendix and Table A1.

                                    To highlight use of these datafiles, 2023 NAMCS HC Component restricted data were used
                                    to examine maternal health visits and visits with gestational diabetes to health centers by
                                    patient’s age. This example was selected given differences in severe maternal morbidity24–26
                                    and mortality,27–29 as well as association of gestational diabetes,30,31 with maternal age. The
                                    rate for maternal health visits was significantly higher among women 20–29 (134.6 visits per
                                    1,000 females) and 30–39 (101.0) years compared to women 12–19 (29.7) and 40–55 (20.3)
                                    years (Table 2). Among these visits, when examining those with a diagnosis of gestational
                                    diabetes, there was a significantly higher rate among visits by women 20–29 (2.6), 30–39
                                    (4.3), and 40–55 (0.8) years compared to those 12–19 (0.1) years. There was also a lower
                                    rate of visits by women 40–55 years compared to those by women 20–29 and 30–39 years.
Author Manuscript




                       Interactive Data Visualizations
                                    The NAMCS HC Component visit-level datafiles may be used for research on specific
                                    topics and to inform evidence-based decision making by patients, families, clinicians, and
                                    policymakers.32 As these stakeholders may not have the statistical knowledge needed to use
                                    microdata files, aggregate estimates from the NAMCS HC Component have been placed in
                                    an interactive data visualization, or “dashboard” (https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/dhcs/prelim-hc-
                                    visits/index.htm) (Figure 1).33 This makes nationally representative, biannual preliminary
                                    estimates of visits to health centers available, prior to the datafiles being released. Users
                                    can navigate interactive drop-down menus to examine diagnoses/conditions and other health
                                    outcome differences across patient characteristics. Corresponding data tables contain counts,
                                    rates, and measures of variance that can be downloaded from the dashboard. With timely
                                    updates and no programming knowledge needed to generate estimates, this dashboard
Author Manuscript




                                    further enhances user accessibility for PCOR.

                                    The following empirical example uses the NAMCS HC Component dashboard to examine
                                    differences in rates for health center visits with diagnosis of lung/breathing-related disease
                                    by race/ethnicity in the United States from January 2022-June 2024 (Table 3). This
                                    topic was selected as respiratory health differences by racial/ethnic groups have long
                                    been documented,34–36 and certain racial/ethnic groups may experience difficulties with
                                    management of respiratory disease37 and complications surrounding the task of addressing
                                    respiratory health problems.38

                                    Using preliminary estimates from the NAMCS HC Component dashboard, there was a
                                    rate of 18.0 visits (per 1,000 people) to health centers with a diagnosis of lung/breathing-
Author Manuscript




                                    related disease in January-June 2022, and a rate of 23.9 visits in January-June 2024
                                    (difference not significant). In July-December 2022 the rate for visits to health centers with
                                    a diagnosis of lung/breathing-related disease among non-Hispanic White people (12.2) was
                                    significantly lower than for Hispanic people (26.8). This difference remained in January-
                                    June 2023 (12.9 vs. 28.5, respectively). In July-December 2023, the rate for visits to health
                                    centers with a diagnosis of lung/breathing-related disease was significantly lower among
                                    non-Hispanic White people (10.3) compared to Hispanic people (27.0), and non-Hispanic
                                    Black people (24.1). These same differences were also found in January-June 2024. For each


                                         Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                             Page 5


                                    racial/ethnicity group, the highest observed rate was in January-June 2024. This example
Author Manuscript




                                    shows how not only researchers but patients, clinicians, and others can conduct their own
                                    interactive PCOR using this dashboard.

                       Linkage to External Data Sources
                                    The NAMCS HC Component facilitates additional PCOR as it allows for linkage to
                                    external data sources. An example of this is linkage at the patient-level of 2021 NAMCS
                                    HC Component data with 2020–2022 housing assistance program data from the U.S.
                                    Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Through this linkage, the resulting
                                    data resource can support public health research and policy evaluation studies focused on
                                    housing assistance program participation and its relation to health outcomes.

                                    Linkage of the NAMCS HC Component and HUD data focuses on HUD’s three largest
                                    housing assistance programs: Housing Choice Vouchers (HCV), Public Housing (PH), and
Author Manuscript




                                    assisted Multifamily (MF) programs. The HCV program is the largest program, allowing
                                    families with lower incomes, older adults, and persons with disabilities to choose/lease
                                    safe and affordable housing on the private market. The PH program provides safe housing
                                    through assigning eligible low-income families, elderly, and persons with disabilities to
                                    specific, subsidized units, buildings, or developments. The MF program encompasses
                                    several HUD programs where subsidies are paid directly to private property owners who
                                    provide a percentage of their housing units at affordable rates for qualifying low-income
                                    persons. A summary of specific HUD programs, and their relation to the NAMCS HC
                                    Component, is provided elsewhere.39

                                    Linkage was attempted only for NAMCS HC Component patient records that met linkage
                                    eligibility criteria. Linkage eligibility is distinct from HUD program eligibility and includes
Author Manuscript




                                    presence of at least two of three valid identifiers on the patient record: social security
                                    number, date of birth (month, day, and year), and name (first, middle initial, and last).
                                    Nearly all patients in the 2021 NAMCS HC Component (i.e., 726,384, or 99.9%) were
                                    eligible for linkage with HUD data. This high level of linkage eligibility was consistent
                                    across non-missing patient age group and sex categories suggesting minimal bias in linkage
                                    eligibility. Linkage was conducted using both deterministic and probabilistic approaches.
                                    For the probabilistic linkage process, scoring was conducted according to Fellegi-Sunter
                                    methodology.40

                                    Table 4 presents total number of 2021 NAMCS HC Component patients by age and sex,
                                    number eligible for linkage, number linked to HUD program data, and percentage of all
                                    patients and those eligible for linkage who were linked to HUD data. A total of 3.6% of
Author Manuscript




                                    the 2021 NAMCS HC Component linkage-eligible patients linked to HUD data, indicating
                                    that they had a record in the HUD administrative datafiles between 2020–2022. Regarding
                                    patient’s age, 4.4% of those 0–17, 3.0% of those 18–44, 3.1% of those 45–64, and 4.7%
                                    of those ≥65 who were linkage-eligible linked to HUD data. As for sex, 2.9% of linkage-
                                    eligible males and 4.1% of linkage-eligible females linked to HUD data. These linked
                                    HUD datafiles, as well as further linkages to the NAMCS HC Component, can allow for
                                    researchers to perform additional PCOR that may not be otherwise facilitated by any one



                                         Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                            Page 6


                                    data source alone. Access to these restricted linked files can be requested through the NCHS
Author Manuscript




                                    Research Data Center (https://www.cdc.gov/rdc/index.html).


                       DISCUSSION
                                    FQHCs and look-alikes have a unique role as community-based settings that provide
                                    services to persons living in HPSAs.1–3 With its 2021 redesign, the NAMCS HC Component
                                    now provides novel and accessible data resources on health center visits to health
                                    researchers, as well as patients, families, clinicians, and policymakers. Restricted and public
                                    use datafiles allow multiple options for researchers to use visit-level data and conduct their
                                    own PCOR on a variety of healthcare topics by various patient characteristics. The NAMCS
                                    HC Component has also been used to create interactive data visualizations that are readily
                                    accessible by anyone to display nationally representative preliminary estimates of visits
                                    to health centers. Finally, with collection of PII, the NAMCS HC Component also has
Author Manuscript




                                    ability to link to external data sources further enhancing its analytic utility. These linkages
                                    allow additional data important to understanding health differences41,42 to be used in further
                                    studying healthcare provided at these centers.

                                    Some limitations of the NAMCS HC Component exist. First, although a primary/reserve
                                    sampling strategy16 and a set-up fee15 are used to maximize the response rate, it remains
                                    lower than desired (e.g., 42.2% year-specific response rate and 30.2% overall rate in
                                    2023).18,23 However, retention of recruited centers remains high (98.4% in 2023),18,23 and a
                                    new sample each year continues to increase the number of participating centers. Second, not
                                    all data elements collected from EHRs are readily-available in the NAMCS HC Component
                                    public use files. However, exploration of adding additional data elements (e.g., lab tests
                                    ordered/performed) to future years’ public use files, as well as integrating additional health
Author Manuscript




                                    topics into data visualizations, is underway. Third, EHR data from some health centers also
                                    has missingness for certain data elements. Normalization techniques can be used to address
                                    this (see Appendix). Finally, linkage to external data sources is currently only available for
                                    the 2021 NAMCS HC Component.

                                    Even with limitations, the NAMCS HC Component resulted in a new resource for
                                    conducting PCOR, with plans to continue expanding its data capacity. Annual data
                                    collection is ongoing, and 2024 restricted and public use datafiles are forthcoming. In
                                    addition, exploration of including additional data elements on these public use files is
                                    underway. Data visualization modules on mental and respiratory health were recently added
                                    to the survey’s dashboard, and timeliness of preliminary estimates has improved, such that
                                    these estimates are available within six months of a visit occurring. Finally, additional data
                                    linkages are scheduled. Linkage of the 2021 NAMCS HC Component to the 2021–2022
Author Manuscript




                                    National Death Index43 and 2020–2022 HUD administrative data39 are complete and linkage
                                    of NAMCS to the 2020–2021 Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System is
                                    underway. With these future plans, not only will the NAMCS HC Component continue
                                    to provide data for studying PCOR at FQHCs and look-alikes, but its accessibility and
                                    expanding infrastructure will allow it to be a reliable resource in future years.




                                         Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                                                    Page 7


                                      Figure 1 is a visual example from the Preliminary Estimates of Visits to Health Centers in
Author Manuscript




                                      the United States Interactive Dashboard, displaying the visit rate (per 1,000 people) of health
                                      center visits for lung/breathing-related diseases, by race/ethnicity.


                       Acknowledgements:
                                      An earlier version of this manuscript was presented at an HHS Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
                                      and Evaluation Research Symposium in December 2024. The authors acknowledge Jessie L. Parker for her
                                      contributions to the development of the linked National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center
                                      Component data files and initial versions of this manuscript.

                       Disclosure of funding:
                                      The authors’ organization received funding that provided partial support for the 2022 National Ambulatory Medical
                                      Care Survey NAMCS Health Center (NAMCS HC) Component, and full support for the linkage of the 2021
                                      NAMCS HC Component to external sources, through the HHS Office of the Secretary Patient-Centered Outcomes
                                      Research Trust Fund projects titled “Enhancing Surveillance of Maternal Health Clinical Practices and Outcomes
Author Manuscript




                                      with Federally Qualified Health Centers’ Electronic Health Records Visit Data” and “Linking Federally Qualified
                                      Health Center EHR and Medicaid Data for Increased Data Capacity to Understand Maternal Health Care” (https://
                                      aspe.hhs.gov/collaborations-committees-advisory-groups/os-pcortf/explore-portfolio).


                       APPENDIX.: ADDITIONAL DETAILS AND INFORMATION ON THE NAMCS
                       HC COMPONENT

                       Data Elements in the NAMCS HC Component Restricted and Public Use
                       Datafiles
                                      As detailed in the main text of the manuscript, in 2022 the National Ambulatory Medical
                                      Care Survey Health Center (NAMCS HC) Component begun having public use datafiles
                                      made available in addition to its restricted files. Details on the number of health centers
Author Manuscript




                                      participating and the number of visit records available for analyses in the NAMCS HC
                                      Component restricted and public use data files are listed in Table 1. The public use versions
                                      of the NAMCS HC Component datafiles differ from the restricted files as they: (a) contain
                                      5% of the total number of health center records collected and include public use versions
                                      of the weights that allow these data to be used for generating nationally representative
                                      estimates of visits to health centers, (b) are accessible with no fee, and (c) prevent the need
                                      for a large amount computing power being a barrier to researchers when analyzing these
                                      data. However, there are also differences in the specific variables included in these datafiles.
                                      The restricted use files have more variables available to researchers than the public use
                                      files, with the main reason of exclusion of variables from the public use files being related
                                      to confidentiality. To help researchers know when they should request the restricted data
                                      as opposed to using the public use data, Table A1 (located at the end of this Appendix)
Author Manuscript




                                      provides a list of the types of variables available in each of these versions of the NAMCS
                                      HC Component data files.


                       Accessing Restricted Data Files and Confidentiality
                                      All data for the NAMCS HC Component and its collection adhere to Section 308(d) of
                                      the Public Health Service Act and the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical
                                      Efficiency Act of 2018. In addition, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act


                                             Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                            Page 8


                                    (HIPAA) of 1996 allows providers to participate in the NAMCS HC Component for public
Author Manuscript




                                    health purposes. More details can be found here: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/namcs-health-
                                    center/about/privacy-and-confidentiality.html.

                                    As noted in the manuscript, NAMCS HC Component restricted datafiles can only be
                                    accessed through the National Center for Health Statistics’ Research Data Center (RDC).
                                    Personally identifiable information collected as part of the NAMCS HC Component is
                                    never permitted to be accessed by data users. Part of the formal application process to
                                    access NAMCS HC Component restricted datafiles in the RDC is a standardized review
                                    to ensure all appropriate confidentiality standards will be followed by the applicant if
                                    data access is granted. Details on this RDC application process can be found here: https://
                                    www.cdc.gov/rdc/index.html.


                       Note on Technical Resources Available for the NAMCS HC Component
Author Manuscript




                                    The discussion of the NAMCS HC Component in the main text of his manuscript is intended
                                    to increase awareness of the survey, how it can be utilized to understand healthcare provided
                                    at FQHCs and look-alikes, and how it can serve as a data resource for patient-centered
                                    outcomes research (PCOR). It was beyond the scope of this manuscript to elaborate in detail
                                    the considerations and technical aspects of the data resulting from this survey; however,
                                    there are resources available that provide this information, and are helpful when using the
                                    data to conduct one’s own PCOR. For researchers interested in using the NAMCS HC
                                    Component visit-level datafiles, previously published reports and manuscripts provide more
                                    in-depth details on the sampling,1 methodology,1 data collection,2 survey content of the
                                    restricted3–5 and public use6,7 files, and analytical considerations.3–7 Furthermore, technical
                                    documentation on data linkage methodology, eligibility, and analytic considerations is also
Author Manuscript




                                    available to researchers for linkage of the NAMCS HC Component to the National Death
                                    Index8 and U.S. Housing and Urban Development administrative data.9 As additional
                                    external data sources are linked to the NAMCS HC Component, it is expected that
                                    similar technical documentation will be made available specific to the external dataset.
                                    Finally, for those families, clinicians, policymakers, and others who use the interactive data
                                    visualizations, these are accompanied by definitions of all health outcomes and patient
                                    characteristics, as well as technical notes on the preliminary data, which can all be reviewed
                                    to better understand the interactive statistics generated when using these visualizations.10


                       Data Missingness and Weight Normalization
                                    For some of the health centers participating in the NAMCS HC Component, there are
                                    instances when data for certain elements may be missing, such as race/ethnicity or even
Author Manuscript




                                    diagnosis.11 In these instances when a health center in the NAMCS HC Component has
                                    complete missingness for a specific variable, they may not be able to be included in a
                                    researcher’s analysis. As a result, the National Center for Health Statistics suggests the
                                    approach to address this and account for this missingness is to normalize the weights used
                                    with the remaining health centers, which allows the sum of weights of visits in the analysis
                                    to equal the sum of weights of all visits.3–7 This is performed using the following formula:




                                         Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                                                          Page 9



                                                                                                   Sum of weigℎts at all visits
                                                          New weigℎt = Original weigℎt*(                                           )
Author Manuscript




                                                                                                 Sum of weigℎts at included visits




                                                                                            TABLE A1.
                                    Types of Data Elements Available in the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health
                                    Center Component Restricted and Public Use Datafiles

                                     Type of Data Element Available        Restricted Use Datafile      Public Use Datafile

                                     Day/month of visit                               Yes                       Yes
                                     Time of visit                                    Yes                        No
                                     Patient’s age                                    Yes                       Yes
                                     Patient’s sex                                    Yes                       Yes
Author Manuscript




                                     Patient’s race/ethnicity                         Yes                       Yes
                                     Patient’s marital status                         Yes                       Yes
                                     Diagnoses (ICD-10-CM)                            Yes                       Yes
                                     Medical procedures                               Yes                        No
                                     Laboratory tests                                 Yes                        No
                                     Biometric/vitals                                 Yes                        No
                                     Medication                                       Yes                        No
                                     Medication status                                Yes                        No
                                     Pregnancy status                                 Yes                        No
                                     Survey stratum                                   Yes                       Yes
                                     Survey weight                                    Yes                       Yes

                                    Note: For each type of data element, there may be more than one specific variable included in the data file. For example, for
Author Manuscript




                                    diagnosis there are 30 data variables available for researchers in the public use data file, with even more variables available
                                    in the restricted use file. A list of specific variables found in the restricted and public use datafiles can be found here:
                                    https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/namcs/documentation/index.html.


                       APPENDIX REFERENCES
                                    1. Williams SN, Ukaigwe J, Ward BW, Okeyode T, Shimizu IM Sampling procedures for the collection
                                       of electronic health record data from federally qualified health centers, 2021-2022 National
                                       Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. Vital Health Stat 2023;2(203):1–9.
                                    2. Cummings NA, Onukwufor JE, Ward BW, Williams SN Use of a set-up fee to encourage survey
                                       Participation and electronic health record submission for a national health care survey. Survey
                                       Practice 2024;17(September). 10.29115/SP-2024-0014.
                                    3. National Center for Health Statistics. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center
                                       Component 2021 restricted use file data dictionary. Accessed September 25, 2024. https://
                                       www.cdc.gov/rdc/data/b1/2021-NAMCS-HCC-RDC-Data-Dictionary-508.pdf.
Author Manuscript




                                    4. National Center for Health Statistics. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center
                                       Component 2022 restricted use file data dictionary. Accessed September 25, 2024. https://
                                       www.cdc.gov/rdc/data/b1/2022-NAMCS-HCC-RDC-Data-Dictionary-508.pdf.
                                    5. National Center for Health Statistics. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health
                                       Center Component 2023 restricted use file data dictionary. Accessed January 8, 2024. https://
                                       www.cdc.gov/rdc/data/b1/2023-NAMCS-HC-Component-RDC-Data-Dictionary.pdf.
                                    6. National Center for Health Statistics, Division of Health Care Statistics. 2022 National Ambulatory
                                       Medical Care Survey Health Center (NAMCS HC) Component public use data file documentation.




                                           Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                                      Page 10


                                       National Center for Health Statistics; 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/namcs/documentation/about-
                                       the-data-2022.html.
Author Manuscript




                                    7. National Center for Health Statistics. Division of Health Care Statistics. 2023 National Ambulatory
                                       medical Care Survey Health Center (NAMCS HC) Component public use data file documentation.
                                       National Center for Health Statistics; 2025. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/namcs/documentation/about-
                                       the-data-2023.html.
                                    8. National Center for Health Statistics, Division of Analysis and Epidemiology. The linkage of
                                       the 2021 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) Health Center (HC) Component
                                       to 2021-2022 National Death Index: linkage methodology and analytic considerations. National
                                       Center for Health Statistics; 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/datalinkage/NAMCS-HC-NDI-
                                       Methodology-Analytic-Considerations.pdf.
                                    9. National Center for Health Statistics, Division of Analysis and Epidemiology. The linkage of
                                       the 2021 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) Health Center (HC) Component
                                       to 2020-2022 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development administrative data: linkage
                                       methodology and analytic considerations. National Center for Health Statistics; 2024. https://
                                       www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/datalinkage/NAMCS-HC-HUD-Methodology-Analytic-Considerations.pdf.
Author Manuscript




                                    10. National Center for Health Statistics. Preliminary estimates of visits to health centers in the United
                                         States. Generated interactively: July 15, 2025, from: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/dhcs/prelim-hc-
                                         visits/index.htm.
                                    11. Santo L, Peters ZJ, Guluma L, Ashman JJ Visits to health centers, by selected characteristics:
                                         United States, 2023. Natl Health Stat Report 2025;216:1–11.


                       REFERENCES
                                    1. Health Resources & Services Administration. What is a health center? Accessed September 11,
                                       2024. https://bphc.hrsa.gov/about-health-center-program/what-health-center.
                                    2. Lee EK, Donley G, Ciesielski TH, Freedman DA, Cole MB. Spatial availability of federally
                                       qualified health centers in disparities in health services utilization in medically underserved areas.
                                       Soc Sci Med 2023;328:116009. [PubMed: 37301106]
                                    3. Shin P, Alvarez C, Sharac J, Rosenbaum SJ, Van Vleet A. A profile of community health
                                       center participants: implications for policy. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. 2013. https://
Author Manuscript




                                       hsrc.himmelfarb.gwu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1042&context=sphhs_policy_ggrchn.
                                    4. Cole MB, Lee EK, Frogner BK, Wright B. Changes in performance measures and service volume
                                       at US federally qualified health centers during the COVID-19 pandemic. JAMA Health Forum.
                                       2023;4(4):e230351. [PubMed: 37027165]
                                    5. Shi L, Tsai J, Higgins PC, Lebrun LA. Racial/ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in access to care
                                       and quality of care for US health center patients compared with non-health center patients. J Ambul
                                       Care Manage. 2009;32(4):342–350. [PubMed: 19888011]
                                    6. Politzer RM, Yoon J, Shi L, Hughes RG, Regan J, Gaston MH. Inequality in America: the
                                       contribution of health centers in reducing and eliminating disparities in access to care. Med Care
                                       Res Rev. 2001;58(2):234–248. [PubMed: 11398647]
                                    7. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People 2030: Access to Health Services.
                                       Accessed September 11, 2024. https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/social-determinants-
                                       health/literature-summaries/access-health-services.
                                    8. Goldman LE, Chu PW, Tran H, Romano MJ, Stafford RS. Federally qualified health centers and
Author Manuscript




                                       private practice performance on ambulatory care measures. Am J Prev Med 2012;43(2):142–149.
                                       [PubMed: 22813678]
                                    9. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2023 national health care quality and disparities
                                       report (AHRQ Pub. No. 23[24]-0091-EF). Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2023.
                                       https://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr23/index.html.
                                    10. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Monitoring Access to Personal Health Care Services.
                                         Access to health care in America. (Millman M, ed.). National Academies Press; 1993.
                                    11. Health Resources & Services Administration. 2023 patient characteristics snapshot. Rockville,
                                         MD. https://data.hrsa.gov/tools/data-reporting/data-snapshot.



                                          Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                                   Page 11


                                    12. Shrider EA. Poverty in the United States: 2023. Current Population Reports (P60–283).
                                        Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau. 2024.
Author Manuscript




                                    13. Health Resources & Services Administration. Health Center Program Uniform Data System (UDS)
                                        overview. Access September 13, 2024. https://data.hrsa.gov/tools/data-reporting/program-data.
                                    14. Health Resources & Services Administration. Uniform Data System (UDS) modernization
                                        initiative. Accessed September 13, 2024. https://bphc.hrsa.gov/data-reporting/uds-training-and-
                                        technical-assistance/uniform-data-system-uds-modernization-initiative.
                                    15. Cummings NA, Onukwufor JE, Ward BW, Williams SN. Use of a set-up fee to encourage survey
                                        Participation and electronic health record submission for a national health care survey. Survey
                                        Practice 2024;17(September). 10.29115/SP-2024-0014.
                                    16. Williams SN, Ukaigwe J, Ward BW, Okeyode T, Shimizu IM. Sampling procedures for the
                                        collection of electronic health record data from federally qualified health centers, 2021–2022
                                        National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. Vital Health Stat 2023;2(203):1–9.
                                    17. National Center for Health Statistics, Division of Health Care Statistics. 2022 National Ambulatory
                                        Medical Care Survey Health Center (NAMCS HC) Component public use data file documentation.
                                        National Center for Health Statistics; 2024. https://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/
Author Manuscript




                                        Dataset_Documentation/NAMCS_HC/2022/2022-NAMCS-HCC-PUF-Tech-Doc-508.pdf.
                                    18. National Center for Health Statistics, Division of Health Care Statistics. 2023 National Ambulatory
                                        Medical Care Survey Health Center (NAMCS HC) Component public use data file documentation.
                                        National Center for Health Statistics; 2025. https://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/
                                        Dataset_Documentation/NAMCS_HC/2023/2023-NAMCS-HC-Component-Tech-Doc.pdf.
                                    19. Health Level Seven International (HL7). 2021. HL7 CDA R2 implementation guide: National
                                        Health Care Surveys (NHCS), release 1, DSTU release 1.2—US realm. https://www.hl7.org/
                                        implement/standards/product_brief.cfm?product_id=385. Accessed October 10, 2024.
                                    20. Santo L, Guluma L, Ashman JJ. Visit rates for adolescents and adults with mental health disorders,
                                        substance use disorders, or both disorders at health centers, by age: United States, 2022. NCHS
                                        Health E-stats. 2024. 10.15620/cdc/160501.
                                    21. National Center for Health Statistics. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center
                                        Component 2021 restricted use file data dictionary. Accessed September 25, 2024. https://
                                        www.cdc.gov/rdc/data/b1/2021-NAMCS-HCC-RDC-Data-Dictionary-508.pdf.
                                    22. National Center for Health Statistics. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center
Author Manuscript




                                        Component 2022 restricted use file data dictionary. Accessed September 25, 2024. https://
                                        www.cdc.gov/rdc/data/b1/2022-NAMCS-HCC-RDC-Data-Dictionary-508.pdf.
                                    23. National Center for Health Statistics. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health
                                        Center Component 2023 restricted use file data dictionary. Accessed January 8, 2024. https://
                                        www.cdc.gov/rdc/data/b1/2023-NAMCS-HCC-RDC-Data-Dictionary-508.pdf.
                                    24. Lisonkova S, Potts J, Muraca GM, Razaz N, Sabr Y, Chan WS, Kramer M. Maternal age
                                        and severe maternal morbidity: a population-based retrospective cohort study. PLoS Med
                                        2017;14(5):e1002307. [PubMed: 28558024]
                                    25. Carr RC, McKinney DN, Cherry AL, Defranco EA. Maternal age-specific drivers of severe
                                        maternal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM. 2022;4(2):100529. [PubMed: 34798330]
                                    26. Hazlina NHN, Norhayati MN, Bahari IS, Kamil HRM. The prevalence and risk factors for
                                        severe maternal morbidities: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front Med (Lausanne).
                                        2022;9:861028. [PubMed: 35372381]
                                    27. Chin JJ, Eisenberg E, Dickerson SA, King RB, Chakhtoura N, Lim IAL, Grantz KL, Lamar C,
Author Manuscript




                                        Bianch DW. Maternal mortality in the United States: research gaps, opportunities, and priorities.
                                        Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2020;223(4):486–492. [PubMed: 32682858]
                                    28. Fink DA, Kilday D, Cao Z, Larson K, Smith A, Lipkin C, Perigard R, Marshall R, Deirmenjian,
                                        Finke A, Tatum D, Rosenthal N. Trends in maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity
                                        during delivery-related hospitalizations in the United States, 2008 to 2021. JAMA Netw Open
                                        2023;6(6):e2317641. [PubMed: 37347486]
                                    29. Hoyert DL. Maternal mortality rates in the United States, 2022. NCHS Health E-Stats. 2024.
                                        10.15620/cdc/152992.




                                          Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                                     Page 12


                                    30. Li Y, Ren X, Li J, Zhang S, Chen W. Maternal age and the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus:
                                        a systematic review and meta-analysis of over 120 million participants. Diabetes Res Clin Pract
Author Manuscript




                                        162:108044.
                                    31. Martin JA, Gregory ECW. Quickstats: percentage of mothers with gestational diabetes, by maternal
                                        age – National Vital Statistics System, United States, 2016 and 2021. MMWR Mob Mortal Wkly
                                        Rep 2023;72(1):16.
                                    32. Smith SR, Evans EL, Brown DS, Reynolds KA, Timbie JW. Economic outcomes in patient-
                                        centered outcomes research. Med Care 2023;61:S89–S91. [PubMed: 37963025]
                                    33. National Center for Health Statistics. Preliminary estimates of visits to health centers in the United
                                        States. Generated interactively January 8, 2025. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/dhcs/prelim-hc-visits/
                                        index.htm.
                                    34. Bhan N, Kawachi I, Glymour MM, Subramanian SV. Time trends in racial and ethnic disparities
                                        in asthma prevalence in the United States from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
                                        (BRFSS) study (1999–2011). Am J Public Health. 2015;105(6):1269–1275. [PubMed: 25320897]
                                    35. Pate CA, Zahran HS, Qin X, Johnson C, Hummelman E, Malily J. Asthma surveillance – United
                                        States, 2006–2018. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2021;70(5):1–32.
Author Manuscript




                                    36. Assari S, Chalin H, Bazargan M. Race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and chronic lung disease in
                                        the U.S. Res Health Sci. 2020;5(1):48–63. [PubMed: 32226910]
                                    37. Ejike CO, Dransfield MT, Hansel NN, Putcha N, Raju S, Martinez CH, Han MK. Chronic
                                        obstructive pulmonary disease in America’s Black population. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
                                        2019;200(4):423–430. [PubMed: 30789750]
                                    38. Baugh A, Thakur N. Race, racism, and respiratory health. Clin Chest Med. 2023;44(3):469–478.
                                        [PubMed: 37517827]
                                    39. National Center for Health Statistics, Division of Analysis and Epidemiology. The
                                        linkage of the 2021 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) Health
                                        Center (HC) Component to 2020–2022 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
                                        Development administrative data: linkage methodology and analytic considerations. National
                                        Center for Health Statistics; 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/datalinkage/NAMCS-HC-HUD-
                                        Methodology-Analytic-Considerations.pdf.
                                    40. Fellegi IP, Sunter AB. A theory for record linkage. J Amer Stat Association. 1969;64(328):1183–
                                        1210.
Author Manuscript




                                    41. Domestic Policy Council, Office of Science and Technology. The U.S. playbook to address social
                                        determinants of health. The White House; November 2023. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
                                        content/uploads/2023/11/SDOH-Playbook-3.pdf.
                                    42. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Addressing health-related
                                        social needs in communities across the nation. U.S. Department of Health
                                        and Human Services; November 2023. https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
                                        3e2f6140d0087435cc6832bf8cf32618/hhs-call-to-action-health-related-social-needs.pdf.
                                    43. National Center for Health Statistics, Division of Analysis and Epidemiology. The linkage of
                                        the 2021 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) Health Center (HC) Component
                                        to 2021–2022 National Death Index: linkage methodology and analytic considerations. National
                                        Center for Health Statistics; 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/datalinkage/NAMCS-HC-NDI-
                                        Methodology-Analytic-Considerations.pdf.
Author Manuscript




                                          Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                         Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                    FIGURE 1.
                                    Visit Rate (per 1,000 People) of Health Center Visits for Lung/breathing-related Diseases,
                                    by Race/Ethnicity: Visual Example from the Preliminary Estimates of Visits to Health
                                    Centers in the United States Interactive Dashboard, Accessed January 8, 2025 at: https://
                                    www.cdc.gov/nchs/dhcs/prelim-hc-visits/index.htm.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                                                                    Page 14




                                                                                          TABLE 1.
                    National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center Component Restricted and Public Use Datafiles,
                    Counts of Participating Health Centers and Visit Records
Author Manuscript




                                    Restricted Use Datafile                  Public Use Datafile

                              # of Health Centers                     # of Health Centers

                              NR     PYP      Total     # of Visits   NR     PYP     Total    # of Visits

                     2021      29      n/a       29     3,543,927     n/a      n/a      n/a           n/a
                     2022      38       26       64     5,640,370      38      26       64       282,017
                     2023      32       63       95     9,012,885      32      63       95       450,645

                    Notes: NR=newly recruited; PYP=previous year participant; n/a=not available. Public use datafiles, which contain a random sample of 5% of
                    visits from the restricted use datafile, were first made available with the 2022 data. In 2023, of the 32 newly recruited health centers, 5 were first
                    contacted in prior years but did not provide data in 2022.
                    Data source: National Center for Health Statistics, National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center Component, 2021–2023, restricted
Author Manuscript




                    and public use datafiles.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                                      Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                    Guluma et al.                                                                                                                            Page 15




                                                                                        TABLE 2.
                    Rates (per 1,000 Women) of Maternal Health Visits to Health Centers and Visits to Health Centers with a
                    Diagnosis of Gestational Diabetes, by Age Group: United States, 2023
Author Manuscript




                                                     Maternal Health Visits           Visits with Diagnosis of Gestational Diabetes

                        Age Group (yrs.)      Visit Rate (per 1,000)     95% CI         Visit Rate (per 1,000)         95% CI

                        12–19                               29.7 b,c    (21.4–41.4)                     0.1 b,c,d       (<0.1–0.1)

                        20–29                              134.6 a,d   (94.3–192.2)                       2.6 a,d         (1.8–3.7)

                        30–39                              101.0 a,d   (74.1–137.8)                       4.3 a,d         (3.0–6.2)

                        40–55                               20.3 b,c    (15.4–26.8)                     0.8 a,b,c         (0.5–1.3)

                    a
                        Significantly different from ages 12–19 yrs.
                    b
                        Significantly different from ages 20–29 yrs.
Author Manuscript




                    c
                        Significantly different from ages 30–39 yrs.
                    d
                        Significantly different from ages 40–55 yrs.
                    Notes: Rates are calculated by dividing the number of health center visits by estimates of the U.S. civilian noninstitutionalized population of
                    women in 2023 (obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Population Division) for the age group (12–55 years) of interest. These rates are among
                    all women, not just those who are pregnant. Maternal health visits are identified by the following ICD-10-CM codes: O00-O92, Z3A, Z30-Z34,
                    Z36, Z37, and/or Z39. Visits with gestational diabetes are identified as visits with an ICD-10-CM code of O244.
                    Data source: National Center for Health Statistics, National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center Component, 2023, restricted use
                    datafile.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                                      Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                                                                 Author Manuscript                                         Author Manuscript                                 Author Manuscript                                      Author Manuscript


                                                                                                                                                                          TABLE 3.
                                                                       Preliminary Biannual Rates (per 1,000 People) for Lung/Breathing-related Disease Visits to Health Centers, by Race/Ethnicity: United States, January
                                                                       2022-June 2024

                                                                                                           Jan.-Jun. 2022                     Jul.-Dec. 2022                     Jan.-Jun. 2023                    Jul.-Dec. 2023                       Jan.-Jun. 2024
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Guluma et al.




                                                                           Race/Ethnicity           Visit Rate (per         95% CI      Visit Rate (per    95% CI          Visit Rate (per    95% CI        Visit Rate (per         95% CI       Visit Rate (per         95% CI
                                                                                                         1,000)                              1,000)                             1,000)                           1,000)                               1,000)

                                                                           Black, non-Hispanic                      25.2     8.7–41.6        26.8              10–43.6          25.9         10.7–41.1           24.1 a           12.4–35.9           36.8 a          18.7–54.8

                                                                           Hispanic                                 25.6    11.9–39.2       26.8 a         13.4–40.2           28.5 a        15.3–41.7           27.0 a           17.8–36.2           31.9 a          20.4–43.5

                                                                           White, non-Hispanic                      13.1     7.3–18.9       12.2 b             7.1–17.4        12.9 b             7.9–18        10.3 b,c            6.1–14.4         14.3 b,c            8.1–20.4

                                                                           All visits                               18.0    11.6–24.5        17.8              11.7–24          18.5         12.5–24.6            19.6            13.4–25.8            23.9           16.1–31.7

                                                                       a
                                                                        Significantly different from White, non-Hispanic.
                                                                       b
                                                                           Significantly different from Hispanic.
                                                                       c
                                                                        Significantly different from Black, non-Hispanic.
                                                                       Notes: Rates are calculated by dividing the number of health center visits by estimates of the U.S. civilian noninstitutionalized population from the year prior (obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s
                                                                       Population Division) for the race/ethnicity group of interest. Lung/breathing-related disease visits are defined as any visit in which had one or more 1CD-10-CM diagnosis codes of J00-J99, U070, U071,
                                                                       and U099. Two-tailed significance tests (p<.05) were conducted to test for differences between racial/ethnic groups.
                                                                       Data source: National Center for Health Statistics, National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center Component, Preliminary Estimates of Visits to Health Centers in the United States Interactive
                                                                       Dashboard, January 2022- June 2024. Accessed January 8, 2025 at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/dhcs/prelim-hc-visits/index.htm.




Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
                                                                 Author Manuscript                                   Author Manuscript                                         Author Manuscript                                           Author Manuscript


                                                                                                                                                                          TABLE 4.
                                                                       Linked 2021 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Health Center (NAMCS HC) Component and 2020–2022 U.S. Housing and Urban Development
                                                                       (HUD) Administrative Records: Sample Sizes and Linkage Rates, by Age and Sex

                                                                                                                                                         Sample Size                                                Percentage Linked
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Guluma et al.




                                                                           2021 NAMCS HC Component            Total Sample     Eligible for Linkage a     Linked to 2020–2022 HUD Administrative Data b              Eligible Sample c


                                                                           Age (in years) d
                                                                             0–17                                   185,969                   185,968                                                      8,253                     4.4
                                                                             18–44                                  271,315                   271,312                                                      8,169                     3.0
                                                                             45–64                                  184,080                   184,080                                                      5,712                     3.1
                                                                             65 and over                             85,020                     85,019                                                     3,994                     4.7
                                                                             Not calculated                             848                          5                                                         0                     0.0
                                                                             Total                                  727,232                   726,384                                                    26,128                      3.6
                                                                           Sex
                                                                             Male                                   309,817                   309,815                                                      8,951                     2.9
                                                                             Female                                 414,112                   414,109                                                    17,128                      4.1
                                                                             Missing                                  3,303                      2,460                                                        49                     2.0
                                                                             Total                                  727,232                   726,384                                                    26,128                      3.6

                                                                       a
                                                                        Eligibility for linkage is based upon having sufficient personally identifiable information in at least two of three valid data elements: social security number, name, and date of birth.
                                                                       b
                                                                           This group includes linkage-eligible patients who linked to HUD enrollment database at any time during the linkage interval (2020–2022).
                                                                       c
                                                                        This percentage is calculated by dividing the number of linked patients by the total number of linkage-eligible patients.




Med Care. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 January 09.
                                                                       d
                                                                        Age is as of final health center visit (date of last known contact) and calculated by subtracting patient date of birth (DOB) from the final visit date. If more than one DOB was present, the minimum of the
                                                                       non-missing DOB was selected.
                                                                       Source: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/datalinkage/NAMCS-HC-HUD-Methodology-Analytic-Considerations.pdf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 17
